In 1964, Atal Bihari Vajpayee, the then Indian Prime Minister, stated that “the answer to an atom bomb is an atomic bomb, nothing else”
10. oldal

The application of nuclear technology for global development The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) regularly outlines the civilian application of nuclear technology in the food and agricultural, water, energy and human health sectors, as well as for the protection of marine and territorial environments (IAEA, 2005a:1339).

Japan is a special case as Japan’s Prime Minister, Junichiro Koizumi (2004:1-2) stated (note the constructivist interpretations added in italics by the authors): As the only nation (identity) in human history to be bombed with atomic weapons (reality), Japan has complied with its peace constitution and firmly maintained the Three Non-Nuclear Principles (ideas), with their strong commitment (interests) not to repeat the tragedy of Hiroshima and Nagasaki (meaning). Japan will continue to pursue this stance, and lead the international community to promote nuclear disarmament and nuclear nonproliferation (action) and devote itself to abolish nuclear weapons (meaning and change) through its enhancement of efforts to call on governments for early ratification of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) (interaction and change).

Ratifying the NonScientia Militaria, South African Journal of Military Studies, Vol 35, Nr 1, 2007. doi: 10.5787/35-1-28 26 Proliferation Treaty (NPT) in 1976


In January 2003, North Korea withdrew completely from the NPT, which it signed in 1985

More importantly, China is a nuclear power and it has assisted the US in its diplomatic endeavours to disarm North Korea (Cox, 1998:224-245; Albrecht, 2000:129)


A poignant example of the way the US has reconstructed its identity, reality and interests is to be found in the events leading up to the Iraq War. The US interpreted certain principles, norms and rules differently from what is universally accepted and agreed. The US’s intervention in Iraq in March 2003 was strongly based on the US’s interpretation of the international legal principles such as “use of force”, “pre-emptive strike”, “preventive war” and “anticipatory self defence” but was actually in breach of the International Law (Kegley & Raymond, 2003:385- 394). Vagts (2001:843-848) asserts that a hegemon can interpret international law and international customary law differently from other actors. This was clearly illustrated in the US’s and UK’s efforts to find (or rather, construct the existence of) nuclear weapons and WMDs in Saddam Hussein’s Iraq. On September 24, 2002, the British Government issued a 53-page report, Iraq’s Weapons of Mass Destruction: the Assessment of the British Government. This report outlined, inter alia, the extent of Iraq’s WMDs and the fact that Saddam Hussein could launch these within 45 minutes against both British and American targets. In February 2003, Colin Powell (the then US Secretary of State) gave an elaborate and impressive presentation of what the US regarded as Iraq’s WMDs and Saddam Hussein’s intentions. Seeking UN Security Council support for an invasion into Iraq, the US, at the time, regarded (or constructed) Iraq’s capabilities as “a looming and increasing threat to the world” (Regan, 2004:8).



A recent effort to introduce an additional constitutive rule is George W. Bush’s establishment of the Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI) in May 2003. The US-led PSI aims to prevent and decrease the illegal trafficking of and trading in nuclear weapons and their delivery systems. More than 60 states are members of the PSI. Despite the US’s pressure, China, India and Indonesia, where some trafficking occurs, oppose the PSI. In May 2004, the US institutionalised another constitutive rule when it established the Global Threat Reduction Initiative (GTRI) “to identify, secure and recover high risk vulnerable nuclear and radiological materials around the world” and to reduce the threat of nuclear terrorism. The GTRI will attempt to minimise the amount of nuclear material available globally. The GTRI is very active Scientia Militaria, South African Journal of Military Studies, Vol 35, Nr 1, 2007. doi: 10.5787/35-1-28 38 in the Soviet successor states and, with the assistance of the IAEA, it has transferred nuclear material, fuel and equipment from the Czech Republic, Romania, Serbia, Montenegro, Bulgaria, Uzbekistan and Latvia to Russia (IAEA, 2005c:1).